[DPE-3253] Charmed Spark tutorial (#87)
canonical/spark-client-snap: docs/tutorial/t-spark-submit.md

from pyspark.sql import SparkSession

def count_vowels(text: str) -> int:
  count = 0
  for char in text:
    if char.lower() in "aeiou":
      count += 1
  return count

# Create a Spark session 
spark = SparkSession\
        .builder\
        .appName("CountVowels")\
        .getOrCreate()

lines = """Canonical's Charmed Data Platform solution for Apache Spark runs Spark jobs on your Kubernetes cluster.
You can get started right away with MicroK8s - the mightiest tiny Kubernetes distro around! 
The spark-client snap simplifies the setup to run Spark jobs against your Kubernetes cluster. 
Spark on Kubernetes is a complex environment with many moving parts.
Sometimes, small mistakes can take a lot of time to debug and figure out.
"""

n = spark.sparkContext.parallelize(lines.splitlines(), 2).map(count_vowels).reduce(add)
print(f"The number of vowels in the string is {n}")

spark.stop()
```

We've added a few more lines to what we've executed so far. The Spark session, which would be available by default in a PySpark shell, needs to be explicitly created. Also, we've added `spark.stop` at the end of the file to stop the Spark session after completion of the job.

> Let's save the aforementioned script in a file named `count_vowels.py`. Once saved, let's copy it to the S3 bucket because it needs to accessible to all executor pods that will process the task. Copying the file to the S3 bucket can be done by the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's save the aforementioned script in a file named `count_vowels.py`. Once saved, let's copy it to the S3 bucket because it needs to be accessible to pods in kubernetes. In fact, when submitting the job, the driver won't be running in the local machine but on a K8s pod, hence the script needs to be downloaded and then executed remotely in a dedicated Pod. Copying the file to the S3 bucket can be done by the following command.
```

I don't think the executor will ever know about the script as much as the executors of the python shell don't know the instructurions beforehand, but they are driven by RPC calls

```bash
aws s3 ls spark-tutorial
# 
# 2024-02-05 05:09:44        925 count_vowels.py
```

Now that the script has been uploaded to S3, we can now run `spark-submit` and specify the path of the script in S3 as an argument.

```bash
spark-client.spark-submit \
    --username spark --namespace spark \
    --deploy-mode cluster \
    s3a://spark-tutorial/count_vowels.py
```

Once you run the command, you'll see a bunch of log outputs in the console with information about the state of the pods executing the task. The state of the pods transition from `ContainerCreating` to `Running` and then finally to `Completed`. The state of the pods can also be viewed using the `kubectl` command in a new shell. 

```bash
watch -n1 "kubectl get pods -n spark"
```

You should see an output similar to the following:
```
NAME                                      READY   STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
...
count-vowels-py-f6af998d77ce02d0-driver   1/1     Running     0          17s
countvowels-2975f78d77ce2e6f-exec-2       1/1     Running     0          6s
countvowels-2975f78d77ce2e6f-exec-1       1/1     Running     0          6s
```

> Among these pods, the one containing the word "driver" is the driver pod and the other two are the executor pods. If you observe closely at the status of the pods while the job is submitted, it is the driver pod that gets created at first. The driver pod spawns executor pods to execute the jobs. Once the job completes, the driver and the exector pods are transitioned to `Completed` state. We can see the job execution logs by viewing pod logs of the driver pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Among these pods, as explained before, we have a "driver" pod, that will be executing the script and orchestrating/coordinating the other two executor pods. If you observe closely at the status of the pods while the job is submitted, it is the driver pod that gets created at first. The driver pod spawns executor pods to execute the jobs. Once the job completes, the driver and the exector pods are transitioned to `Completed` state. We can see the job execution logs by viewing pod logs of the driver pod.
```

# 
# 2024-02-05T05:47:09.183Z [entrypoint] The number of vowels in the string is 128
```

Often times, the data file that's to be processed contains huge amount of data, and it is common to store it in S3 and then have jobs to read data from there to process it. The example program we have discussed earlier can be extended so that the text for which vowel characters are to be counted is now fetched directly from a file in S3. For that, let's download a sample file and then copy it to S3 bucket as follows:

```bash
# Download a sample text file
wget "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/spark-client-snap/3.4/edge/README.md"

aws s3 cp README.md s3://spark-tutorial/README.md
```

Now, let's modify the Python script `count_words.py` to process the lines read from S3 instead.

```python
from operator import add
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession

def count_vowels(text: str) -> int:
  count = 0
  for char in text:
    if char.lower() in "aeiou":
      count += 1
  return count

# Create a Spark session 
spark = SparkSession\
        .builder\
        .appName("SubmitExample")\
        .getOrCreate()

> lines = spark.sparkContext.textFile("s3a://spark-tutorial/README.md")

Reviewer: **suggestion** maybe we could make it something to be provided as input, like [here](https://github.com/deusebio/operator-day-2023-charmed-spark/blob/main/scripts/stock_country_report.py#L10) (and see how to submit a job in the repo therein)
